JTV.apk

IMPLEMENTATION OF PUSH NOTIFICATION IN USER PROFILE BASED ANDROID PROJECT

Abstract - The era of mobile technology opens the windows to the android app. It is the time to change from conventional websites to apps, which has become the part of our daily routine. This project is introducing ‘JTV.apk’, the android application software which showcases the implementation of push notification and provides a platform to the clients of the company to access the videos provided by the company. It gives the facility of log in for old users and registration for new individuals. It allows the users to access the videos provided by the company and a well functioning search area for the users to find the video of their choice. It facilitates users to view and make changes to their profile. Also, it makes the users aware of the latest videos and important information required for the users through notification. After the implementation, a detailed evaluation was conducted using user inspections and user testing techniques to evaluate the success of the project.

Project Summary - The project involved various stages. It all started with familiarizing myself with the development in android, getting acquainted with the development tools, coding instructions, setting up the display and becoming conversant with the IDE. Then developing the project step by step, implementing various features to the layouts, activities and services of the project. The project exhibits the implementation of push notification which would update the users of the application about the important information and latest videos provided by the company. The project consists of a splash screen, a log in screen, a sign up screen, a home screen, a video screen, a profile screen and a search screen. The project provides a comfortable user interface for the clients of the company to avail the videos that the company provides. The individuals can choose to log in or sign up depending on whether they have an account already or not. Successful signing in or signing up will take the user to the home screen where they can select the video they want to watch.

Detailed Analysis -

SPLASH SCREEN - This is the welcome screen which is visible when the app launches. It stays for 5 seconds when the app is loading.

LOG IN SCREEN - This is the second screen which will show up after 5 seconds of the launching of app. As soon as the screen appears, the user will be requested to allow the app to access the device’s location which would help the company to provide customised list of videos. The user can choose to allow or deny. Irrespective of the choice, the user will be able to access the log in screen. It prompts the user to input the email and password. On clicking the login button, the credentials are sent to the server which checks if it is correct or wrong. On receiving the success response, the user will be taken to the home screen. The same screen allows user to go to the sign up screen by clicking on the text to sign up. On clicking ‘Forgot password?’, it provides the user a way to login if he/she has forgotten the password.

SIGN UP SCREEN - This screen appears if the user clicks on ‘Not a member? Sign up now’. This allows a new user to register himself/herself with a unique email id. The user has to provide necessary details like first name, last name, unique email id, date of birth, password and re-type password. Then on clicking submit, the password and re-type password will be compared. If true, the details provided by the user will be sent to server. On success response, the details of the user will be saved in the database of the server and the user will be taken to the home screen.

HOME SCREEN - This screen comes after successful log in or successful sign up. The upper part of the screen contains a banner which changes programmatically every 5 seconds. The lower part contains various lists of videos wrapped by the images of the videos. On clicking the image of the video, the user is taken to the Video screen. The screen also provides the user various menu items. There is a search item and a drop down menu. On clicking the search icon, the user will see the search screen. And on clicking the drop down menu, the user will be introduced with two more options- the option to view the profile and an option to log out. On choosing profile item, the user will see the profile screen and on choosing the log out option, the user will be again taken to the log in screen.

SEARCH SCREEN - This screen provides a search box, where the user can input the title of the video he/she is searching for. Even if the user fails to recall the complete title of the video, he/she can input a part of it, then the user will be given the suggestions of the videos depending on what has been typed. Then on clicking any video, they will be taken to the video screen. In this screen also, the user is given a drop down menu, where he can choose to view the profile by clicking on profile item or choose the log out option to go to the log in screen again.

PROFILE SCREEN - On choosing the profile item from the drop down menu, the user is able to see this screen. Here, the user is shown his/her own profile, which contains the details like first name, last name, email, date of birth and a profile picture. This screen allows the user to edit the details by clicking on the edit icon on the top right corner. Upon clicking, the user is allowed to make changes to the profile picture, first name, last name and date of birth. On clicking the profile image, the user is taken to the Image Upload screen. On clicking the submit button, the details are sent to the server and changes are made in the database. On success response, the user is again taken to the home screen.

IMAGE UPLOAD SCREEN - This screen comes with the permission request, asking the user to allow the camera permissions and storage permissions. On allowing, the user is prompted with two options, whether to take a click from camera now or to choose from the gallery. Choosing to take from camera, opens the camera software of the android and the user can then click the image which he/she wants to upload as their profile image. This will take the user to ‘upload image to server’ option. On clicking it, the image file will be sent to the server. On choosing the option of taking from gallery will open the gallery of the android in which the app is running, allowing the user to pick any picture which they want to set as their profile image. After selecting the image, the user will be given the option to ’upload image to server’. On clicking it, the image file will be sent to the server and the profile image of the user will be changed. If successful, the user will be taken to the home screen.

VIDEO SCREEN - This screen appears when the user selects the image of the video he/she wants to watch. This screen plays the video using YouTube player. It provides the user options to pause, stop, rewind, forward and play on clicking the respective buttons.

PUSH NOTIFICATION SERVICE - A push notification is a message that pops up on a mobile device. App publishers can send them at any time; users don't have to be in the app or using their devices to receive them. This service allows the admin to send notification to anyone who has the app installed in their smart phones. The notification consists of three parts- title, message and image. Title and message part can’t be left empty but image can be null. The notification will be received in the device irrespective of whether the device is in lock mode, it is in background or foreground. When the notification is received in the device, it first appears as an icon in the notification drawer. On scrolling down, the entire notification with the notification icon, title, message and image is shown. On clicking the notification, the application is launched again. In this project, push notification has been implemented with the help of Firebase Cloud Messaging(FCM).
